# X429midterm
ISTA429 Midterm project for Team X

Collaborators:
- Ryan Papetti
- Jordan Elliott
- Nicholas Stout
- Chosen Obih
- Jake Newton 


## Documentation


## 10 Rules to Cultivate Transdisciplinary Collaboration in Data Science:

Develop Reflexive Habits
Developing good reflexive habits are integral to working on an interdisciplinary team in order to understand each other and stay on the same page. This can be accomplished through regular communication and exposure to other disciplines and the way they operate so that you can learn the technical language and understand how to communicate and facilitate collaboration. On our team, we had a fairly wide array of backgrounds, which meant at the beginning everyone assumed different roles to fill a need. As a result of this I think our team had a good opportunity to develop good reflexive habits since we were all learning from each other throughout the project. Additionally, since we had to quickly assemble a team and  work together, I think we all asked questions early on to get on the same page so we understood the midterm assignment and our individual roles. 
Communicate the project management plan early and often
Having a plan regarding project management early on allows for team members to select the tasks they are interested in or are experienced in and contribute to the project on their own terms. Our plan started by assessing each team member's strengths and weaknesses and assigning roles that suit each member's strengths. Those who have experience in Machine Learning and Data Management were put in their respective management roles and they distributed tasks to others where they felt necessary. Similarly, the members with knowledge of plant sciences were put in charge of model weights and interpretation.
Speak the same language
One of the challenges in transdisciplinary research is understanding the technical terms used in the different collaborating fields. Getting everyone to understand basic terms used in the fields of the people involved in the project was our first focus. In order to achieve this, we utilized a glossary of common terms. We also encouraged group members to take time to explain any new technical term not contained in the glossary whenever they use one. We also tried to create a safe environment for everyone to make their input to the project irrespective of their skill level.
Design the project so that everyone benefits
Our team is  made up of members with varying data science skills. In order to get everyone to participate in working on the project, the project was broken down into smaller bits and responsibilities were assigned based on team members’ skill set. During all the team meetings, each member gave an update on what they were working on and which tools they were using. This was so that other members of the team could learn a thing or two about other people’s responsibilities.
Fail early and often
Failing early and often is very typical when you are programming no matter what programming language you are working with. Failing often allows for you to see the progress you are making, get a bug out of the way that might trick you up, and allows you to test different methods of trying to run code. When you fail it allows for your team member to help you understand what the error is, and they might have an easy solution. A team failing early means that they are not waiting till the last minute to try and get things done which in turn will produce bad work and cause a lot of headaches. As you learn more about coding languages you will always run into problems that you haven’t seen before. Just looking at the class we have taken as a group at the University of Arizona I noticed that even professors that have been teaching and doing programming for many years have struggled at times to figure out errors and it takes them a bit of time to find a solution or a better method that will work.  Group members that wait for a while and don’t encounter errors early slow down the progress of the other group members which in turn makes the timeline very difficult to follow and you may not allow your team to get the best results possible.
Share collaboration tools:
Collaboration tools are critical to ensure everyone is on the right task and not repeating work or missing tasks. We are using the Cyverse Wiki to post our results and work that is ready for public view. Google Docs is being utilized for collaborating on the written assignments, Slack is being used for inter-team communication and comments on progress. Github is our central repository for files and data. Setting a data manager at the beginning of the project is crucial to ensuring files aren’t lost or overwritten. Getting everyone on the same applications for collaboration was the first step in collaborating effectively.
Manage your data like the collaboration depends on it
Data management is critical to the success of any development team, maintaining file integrity and preventing data loss will make or break any effort in data science. Version control is usually the best solution to data management problems, it allows each individual to contribute to the project while ensuring that their effort does not compromise the valuable data or overwrite another individual’s work. The collaboration effort is enabled by the data custodian, who can ensure the source files are not affected by every attempt made to analyze the data. Once the source data is changed or lost by one person, the data is lost by all, and progress is either slowed or entirely halted on the project. The way that we prevented this was to implement Github version control on our code and separate the source files from the output files.
Write code that others can use and reproduce
Reproducible code is the result of proper documentation and commenting, if others cannot understand the method or logic behind the code, the code becomes an artifact, unique and lost to time. By commenting one's code, the logic becomes readable, even if the code becomes outdated, the method can be implemented in a different language or updated to run properly. Documentation is key because it fills in the knowledge gaps and contextual information to the problem and the code’s solution to that problem. In regards to the code itself, there is a principle in Computer Science that speaks to generics, if the goal is to implement a data structure that sorts data a certain way, the code should be able to handle different types of information. The code should be able to handle integer inputs as well as strings, even certain kinds of objects or structures. By implementing this principle, code can be used across platforms and across computer languages. We accomplished this by documenting our methods on Github and ensuring that our code is open-source.
Observe ethical hygiene
As mentioned in the website, keeping in mind how our techniques and practices could be used outside of our intended application helps ensure those techniques are not used for malicious purposes. We carefully selected the right License to accompany our project so that there is transparency in how our data is used. Transparency allows us to keep an eye on non-legitimate uses of techniques. In addition to preventing malicious use, following ethical guidelines is meant to be a framework for improving accountability, responsibility, and reproducibility within the community. 
Document your collaboration
Journaling progress towards the project goal is an important habit to benefit learning and understanding after project completion. This allows other groups or individuals to see the difficulties presented by the project and see the steps taken to solve those problems, and perhaps make different choices or understand the choices made. Luckily for us, Slack and Github track changes and commit messages allow for easy retrospective analysis on our thought processes. We decided to opt towards a more data driven approach in journaling, where commit messages and an after-action review are the primary means of documenting our difficulties and challenges.
